# Introduction to UI Analysis and Design

A well-designed user interface **minimizes confusion**.
It leads users toward easy achievement of their own goals.

## Introduction to Human Computer Interaction (HCI)

### Definitions of HCI

- The way people and computing influence each other
- The way humans interact with computers
- The design, evaluation, and implementation of computing systems for human use

User Interface Design is important because for the user, **the UI is the system**.

## User Productivity

UI is directly linked to user productivity.

::: center
User Productivity = Functionality \* Usability

_If either is zero, the system is useless_
:::

## Defining a set of goals for the UI

Improve productivity and reduce costs through:

- **Proper functionality**: The program functions as expected
- **Consistency**: A UI element has the same behavior everywhere it is used (helps build mental models, use of metaphors)
- **Efficiency**: A good UI will assist users to complete tasks in timely manner and eliminate unnecessary steps
- **Usability**: System is easy to learn and intuitive
- **Reliability**: System functions without major flaws
- **Security and Data integrity**: System protects users data from tampering and alteration

::: tip Course Meta
A lot of the content of this course is theory.
There will be lots of concepts and definitions which will seem obvious, but still needs to be memorized.
:::

## Investigating Users

### Types of users

- **Role**: Pattern of use
  - manager, salesperson, client, etc.
- **Ability**
  - physical disability, colorblind, illiteracy, domain expert/novice, etc.
- **Personality**
  - shy, disinterested, intimidated, etc.

Example: [The Seven Types of iPhone Owners](https://www.allareacodes.com/7-types-of-iphone-users/)

## HCI in Software Engineering

Can be viewed in multiple different ways (i.e. waterfall and iterative view).

The iterative view focuses on repeat cycles of _designing_, _prototyping_, _evaluation_, and _implementation_ of user interfaces.
